# Karnaugh Maps

## Canonical Sum/Product from Algebra Review

$$F = X \cdot Y + X' \cdot Z'$$
$$F = X \cdot Y \cdot (Z + Z') + X' \cdot Z' \cdot (Y + Y')$$
$$F = X \cdot Y \cdot Z + X \cdot Y \cdot Z'
+ X' \cdot Y \cdot Z' + X' \cdot Y' \cdot Z'$$
$$F = \sum_{X,Y,Z} (0,2,6,7)$$

## Karnaugh Maps (K-Maps)

Graphical representation of the truth table

### Intro Example: XOR

Truth Table:

| X | Y | F |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 0 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 0 | 1 |
| 1 | 1 | 0 |

K-Map:

| Y \ X | 0 | 1 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | $0^0$ | $1^2$ |
| 1 | $1^1$ | $0^3$ |

### Example 2: Carry Out of Full Adder

| X | Y | Z | F |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 |
| 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 |
| 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |

> **VERY IMPORTANT:** Only one variable can change as you increase the column
by one. The top row went from 01 to 11, and not to 10 because in that case
, both X and Y would change.

| $\frac{XY}{Z}$ | 00 | 01 | 11 | 10 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | $0^0$ | $0^2$ | $1^6$ | $0^4$ |
| 1 | $0^1$ | $1^4$ | $1^7$ | $1^5$ |

> Note how the numbers in the top right represent the row numbers of
the truth table.

### Example 3: Four Variable Function

It looks pretty much the same, but with the
"00,01,11,10" pattern vertically too.

If you have more than 4 variables, you go
3D with more 4x4 tables. (2 for 5 vars, 4 for 6 vars)

## Minimizing the Sum-Of-Products with K-Maps

- Each input combination with a "1" output
corresponds to a minterm in the canonical sum.
- Pairs of adjacent 1-cells inm the K-map
have minterms that differ only in 1 variable
  - This means that minterm pairs can be combined
  into a single product
  - Remember it can wrap around
- Cell combining can be extended to more than
two-1-cells into a single-product term. The
numer of cells that are combined should be a
power of 2.
  - This means that you can combine rectangles
- In general, $2^i$ 1-cells can be combined
to form a product term with $n-1$ literals.
  - $n$ number of inputs
- A set of $2^i$ 1-cells may be combined if
there are $i$ variables of the logic function
that take on all $2^i$ combinations within that set,
while $n-i$ variables have the same value throughout.
Corresponding product term will have $n-i$ literals
for each variable.
  - If the variable is 0 in the area: use complement
  - If the variable is 1 in the area: don't complement
  - If the variable is 0 or 1 in the area: it does
  not appear in the product term

These rules are enforced by switching algebra

### Example 1:

$$F = \sum_{A,B,C} (0,2,4,7)$$

| C \ AB | 00 | 01 | 11 | 10 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | $1^0$ | $1^2$ | $0^6$ | $1^4$ |
| 1 | $0^1$ | $0^3$ | $1^7$ | $0^5$ |

$$F = B$$

### Example 2:

$$F = \sum_{A,B,C,D} (1,3,5,8,9,11,13)$$

| CD \ AB | 00 | 01 | 11 | 10 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 00 | $0^0$ | $0^4$ | $0^{12}$ | $1^8$ |
| 01 | $1^1$ | $1^5$ | $1^{13}$ | $1^9$ |
| 11 | $1^3$ | $0^7$ | $0^{15}$ | $1^{11}$ |
| 10 | $0^2$ | $0^6$ | $0^{14}$ | $0^{10}$ |

- Step 1: Find the largest set of connected
1s that has cardinality of $2^i$.
  - The square made by 1,3,9,11 is good
  - This square is $B' \cdot D$
- Repeat for an uncovered 1-cells: (Still get the largest
rectangle, don't just fill the uncovered positions)
  - The rectangle made by 1,5,13,9
  - This rectangle is $C' \cdot D$
- Repeat for all uncovered "1"s: (In this case just 8)
  - Rectangle of 8,9
  - $A \cdot B' \cdot C'$
- Final Canonical Sum:
  - $B' \cdot D + C' \cdot D + A \cdot B' \cdot C'$

Graphically, we can circle rectangular sets of
$2^i$ 1-cells.

### Definitions:

**Minimal Sum:** Sum-of-products expression for F
such that no sum-of-products expression for F
has fewer product terms, and any sum-of-products
expression with the same number of product terms
has at least as many literals.

**Implicant**: P is an implicant of F
if P implies F.

**Prime Implicant**: The most reduced form of
an implicant. i.e. It's a normal product term P
that implies F.

- In K-maps, circled set of 1-cells
that satisfy the combining rule is a prime
implicant.

### Example:

$F = XY + YZ + W$

- $XYZ$ is an implicant of $F$
- $XY$ is a prime implicant of $F$
